You don't need to know a lot of calculus to understand deep learning, but you do need to know a little
bit of calculus.
In particular derivatives.
So the goal of this video and the next video is to introduce you to the key topics in derivatives that
you will need to know to understand the mechanisms of deep learning and in particular gradient descent.
Now a really full, complete, rigorous understanding of derivatives and how to compute and interpret
derivatives, and how to take derivatives of lots of different kinds of functions, that is way beyond
the scope of this course.
In fact, taking derivatives is basically the entire purpose of your first semester of calculus.
University level calculus starts off with three months just on the derivative.
And so yeah, we're not obviously not going to learn everything about the derivative in the next two
videos, but by the end of this video, you will understand the intuition and interpretation of the
derivative, and you will also know how to compute the derivatives of polynomials.
We'll go through a little bit of theory in the slides, and then we will switch to Python.
And I'll give you code that will allow you to continue exploring the derivatives of various functions.
So let's begin with a couple of functions.
So here you see two functions.
This one is flat and then it goes up.
This one is like smoothly going up from zero up to one.
This particular function is called a ReLU that stands for rectified linear unit.
Don't worry about the term.
I'm going to define this later.
This is a sigmoid function.
You can see it looks a little bit like an S.
These are actually two really important functions that are used in deep learning.
These are called activation functions.
You'll learn all about activation functions, the formulas for these and how they are useful, and so
on.
Later on in the course.
For now, the main point is just to have a graphical example of two functions.
Now these are not derivatives, these are the functions.
The derivative of a function tells us how the function is changing over the x variable.
Maybe this is time, or maybe this is space.
Or maybe this is some abstracted variable, like an error landscape or a loss landscape.
So let's start with this one.
So this is the function the ReLU function.
This is the derivative of the ReLU function.
Now what does this mean.
Well if we look at this function we can see it's not changing in the on the y axis.
It doesn't change over the x axis.
So that means the slope of this line.
The change in this line the slope is zero and that we see here the derivative is zero.
Now something happens over here at x equals zero and the slope is no longer zero.
Now the function is changing but it's changing in a constant way.
So the slope is in fact one.
It's not totally obvious from this graph here.
But you know this goes through the .11223344 and so on.
So this is just the unity function here.
So the slope is one everywhere above zero.
And then when we look here in the derivative plot we see that the slope is one above zero.
Okay.
So the derivative is nothing more than the slope of the function at each point.
So now we have this sigmoid function.
And here is its derivative.
It looks a little bit like a Gaussian actually.
So let's make sure that we can make this derivative make sense in the context of what we see here.
So first of all notice that the function is always increasing.
It's always going up.
It never goes down.
So the slope is always going to be positive.
And that's what we see here in the derivative plot.
The derivative which is the slope is always above zero.
But now unlike with the ReLU function, the derivative of the sigmoid is curvy and it's always changing.
So how do we make sense of this?
Well, if we look at the sigmoid function over here, we see that it's increasing but it's increasing
very very slowly.
So it's only rising very slowly here.
As we get closer to zero it's starting to rise faster.
So the slope is larger.
And that's what we see here.
The slope is larger.
Now we get this funny reversal here around zero where the function is still increasing, but it's now
increasing more and more slowly.
So the rate at which this function increases is decreasing.
It's and slowing down.
So the derivative is always positive because the function is is increasing, but the rate at which it's
increasing is getting smaller as we get to larger values of x.
So this is the derivative here by the way.
Notice also the scale here.
This goes up to like point a little over point two.
So in fact if you would put these on the same plot the derivative would only go up to here.
You know somewhere around here that's going to be relevant for later in the course.
When we talk about the advantages and limitations of using different activation functions, the magnitude
of these derivatives here, okay.
But that's not the point.
Now here I just wanted to give you a geometric and visual intuition of the derivative.
So again the derivative is just the slope of the line as it's changing okay.
So that's for geometry.
Now we get to the algebra of a derivative.
So how do you actually compute a derivative.
Well there's many different kinds of functions, and the way that you compute the derivative changes
depending on the different functions.
This is in calculus.
You would memorize lots and lots of rules for derivatives here in this video, just to give you a sense,
give you a bit of a flavor of computing derivatives.
We're going to focus on computing the derivatives of polynomials, because those are kind of the easiest
to do in calculus.
So a polynomial is a function that has a an unknown a coefficient and a some power.
So here's an example of a polynomial x squared.
So we have our variable x and it's raised to a power which in this case is two.
The coefficient would be a number that multiplies the x which in this case is well it's implicitly the
number one okay.
So the derivative there's several different ways of notating the derivative.
So it's one way that it's shown is by dy divided by dx.
So the d is indicating the derivative, or a tiny tiny little change in x.
Okay.
So the derivative of x squared is two times x to the power of one.
Here's another example.
The derivative of x cubed is three times x squared.
One more example.
The derivative of three times x to the power of three is nine times x to the power of two.
Can you start to see the pattern here?
Here is the formula.
The formula for computing the derivative of a polynomial is.
You take the power and bring it down and multiply that as a coefficient.
And then you change the power to n minus one.
So the derivative of a times x to the power of n is n.
So we bring down the exponent times a.
We don't change the coefficient times x to the power of n minus one.
So if you like, you can pause the video for a moment and just take a few seconds to go through each
of these examples and confirm that they all follow this pattern.
Now, of course, you know, deriving this formula, this is not just something that appears out of
the blue.
This is something you can derive.
But you know, that's something for a course on calculus.
Not not this course on deep learning.
Okay.
So let's see a graphical example again to match the geometry the visual intuition with the algebra.
So here's our function x squared.
So what is the derivative of x squared.
You guessed it it is.
Oh well here's the plot.
So you know what the plot of x squared looks like.
And the derivative is two x.
So we bring down the two and we knock down the exponent by subtracting off one.
So this is two times x to the power of one which is just two x.
Here's another notation for indicating the derivative.
Instead of writing dy by dx.
You can also write a little apostrophe here after the function symbol.
Okay, so here's the function.
And before even plotting this, let's let's think about what the derivative should be.
Well here the function is going down.
The slope is negative.
So the derivative must be below zero here.
Here the function is going up.
So the derivative is positive.
The derivative has to be above zero here.
And we can also see that the slope is changing very quickly.
The decline is very fast over here.
And then it goes it gets more shallow here.
So the slope is still negative here close to zero.
But it's relatively shallow.
It's not decreasing that fast.
Likewise here the function is increasing.
So the slope is positive but it's not really increasing that fast.
And it increases much faster over here.
Okay.
Well you know what the plot of two x looks like.
It's just a straight line with a slope of two.
So we see, you know, at before zero We have a negative slope or negative derivative after zero.
We have a positive derivative and as you get closer to zero, the derivative is also getting closer
to zero.
Now why do we care about derivatives?
After all, this is a course on deep learning, not on calculus.
So who cares about derivatives?
Well, we know that derivatives point us in the direction of increases and decreases in a mathematical
function.
That's really just the definition of a derivative.
It tells us where and how quickly the function is increasing or decreasing.
So in deep learning, the goal of our deep learning and our training algorithm, that goal gets represented
mathematically as an error function.
So the goal, the way we would explain it in, in English in human terms, is that we are trying to
get the model to classify certain images or data values or, you know, whatever the goal of the model
is to classify and have high performance, but we have to translate that goal into a mathematical function,
and that function is an error function.
And so therefore, the goal of deep learning, the goal of training in deep learning is to find the
specific parameters for the model that give us the smallest error.
And the smallest error is the same thing as the highest accuracy.
So then we use the derivative to tell us which way to move, quote unquote, which how to change the
weights of the model, how to change the parameters of the model in that error landscape, or that error
function in order to find the best solution.
So, in fact, we wouldn't get very far in deep learning without derivatives.
We would get nowhere.
So we need derivatives in order to train the model to be able to classify different inputs.
Now I realize that there's a lot of statements to unpack.
There's a lot of claims to explain in this slide.
That's pretty much the entire goal of the next section called gradient descent.
So gradient descent is basically the term for the algorithm that tells us how to use derivatives to
update the model to achieve our goal of classification.
So if you know, if you're wondering if you're scratching your head, wondering how you know, what
does this mean and how do I make these claims, don't worry, that's the whole point of the next section.
For now, I want to switch to Python and show you how to compute and visualize derivatives using the
SymPy library.
Okay, so we are going to use a library called SymPy.
This is for symbolic math.
Now the SymPy library actually is pretty rich.
There's a lot of stuff going on in the SymPy library we are not really going to use the SymPy library
that much in this course, except for the next couple videos and also the next section on gradient descent.
So don't be too concerned if some of the code that I'm writing in the rest of this notebook is a little
mysterious and complicated looking.
We don't actually need SymPy for deep learning.
It's just for the next, you know, half dozen or ten videos or so.
Okay, so let's run this code to import SymPy and also the SymPy plotting module.
Okay.
Now I'm going to create a symbolic variable x.
This is like a regular variable.
But it's some SymPy will allow us to use this symbolic variable to compute derivatives.
Okay.
So here's our function two times x squared.
Now we already can compute even in our heads we can compute the derivative of this function.
Remember to compute the derivative of a polynomial you take the exponent and you bring it out in front
and multiply it by the coefficient, so that becomes four.
And then you subtract off one.
So we know that the derivative of this function is four times x to the power of one, which is just
four times x.
Okay.
So let's confirm that using SymPy.
So here we use SymPy diff which is the discrete derivative.
And indeed the the derivative of this function is four x.
Here I'm using SymPy to plot the function and its derivative.
And that's what you see here.
Here's the function and its derivatives.
Basically the same as the example that I showed in the slides a moment ago.
Okay.
So that was for two x squared for a simple polynomial.
Now we are going to repeat this with the ReLU and the sigmoid functions.
These are the two functions that I showed in the beginning of the video.
So this turns out to be the formula for computing the ReLU function.
It's just the maximum of zero or the function.
It's the input itself.
So that's the ReLU function.
Here's the formula for sigmoid.
It's one divided by one plus e to the minus x.
I'm going to talk a lot more about the sigmoid function and what it means, how to interpret it, how
to parameterize it.
But that's coming later on in the course.
You don't need to worry too much about the origins of this function.
Now suffice it to say, this is the math formula that gives us that kind of s looking shape.
Okay, now plotting in SymPy is a little bit different.
It's a little bit more involved than plotting in matplotlib.
This is why I mentioned a moment ago that, you know, I don't want you to stress too much about the
details of plotting in SymPy, because we're only going to be using it for basically this video and
a couple of videos in the next section.
The important point is here.
I'm plotting both of these functions on the same graph, the ReLU and the sigmoid function.
And then here in a separate graph I'm going to plot their derivatives.
So this is the derivative of the ReLU and the derivative of the sigmoid.
Okay.
So now we can see here you see the the ReLU and the sigmoid on the same graph.
And here you see the derivatives also on the same graph.
I hope from this video you now have an intuition of the derivative.
It's essentially just how things change over the inputs.
And I also showed you how to compute the derivative of a polynomial.
I hinted at the application, the importance of the derivative in deep learning, and you will learn
much more about this in the next section on gradient descent.
But first I need to tell you a little bit more about derivatives and computing the derivatives of multiple
functions that's coming up in the next video.